[Music]
let us look at the storage related
aspects that are the advanced aspects of
linux you may not have any live demo as
part of this particular
section because
these are all one time activities and
one should not be messing around with
these commands but i want to mention
them here so that you can read about
them and when you have a new machine
that you want to configure
your awareness about these may help you
also identify the right kind of a
configuration
so there are two things that we need to
learn about
the first thing is the logical volume
management which means that
if you have multiple physical disks
they can actually be considered as a
single logical volume by the linux
operating system
so it means for example
you may have
several disks
of a particular size but
the partition that you would like to
have needs a lot of space
and there is no hard disk that will come
in that particular size now what do we
do so you can actually define a logical
volume which spans over all those disks
so that the volume is
shown to you as if it is at a higher
capacity though individual disks may be
at a lower capacity now that is
something that is very convenient so
that we are not limited by the
availability of for that particular size
of the hard disk okay so pulling
multiple storage devices as a single
logical volume is something that is very
much well established in the next
and there are a whole bunch of tools
that come under the
package lvm2
where we can create and manage virtual
block devices from physical devices and
what are mounted in the linux operator
system by the file system are actually
the virtual block devices
which are mapped over to multiple
physical devices so that we don't have
to worry about which piece of data is
written to which disk we are looking at
as a continuous continuous segment of a
logical volume
and raid is another concept that we must
be familiar it expands to redundant
arrays of independent disks
and this is basically for multiple
purposes essentially
to have higher speed
and for
redundancy so that if any of the disks
fail the storage box would not go out of
its usage but you are able to recover
the data and go on to continue using the
rest of the disks
by replacing the damaged disk with a new
one
and the data should get rebuilt by
itself so some of those advanced
features are very much possible today
and what is done uh in this particular
action namely
writing the data to multiple disks and
making two copies of some of the data
in two different disks
and and also to ensure that when a new
disk has been replaced
then writing the data onto it correctly
so all these are done by what's called a
raid controller
and rate controller can be a software or
hardware today
hardware rate controllers are not very
expensive so if you are buying a
workstation you can buy one with a raid
controller so that you have the ability
to
have multiple
hard disks
which can be combined as a single
storage
now there are various raid modes that
are available so these come in
continuous sequence from 0 to 6 but i am
giving you here what are more popularly
used so raid 0
is
for striping which means that if you are
going to use two disks you can think of
the two disks as one so where half of
the files are written in both the disks
so that they are like two stripes and
the capacity is now double so where does
it help it basically helps in doubling
up the speed of access of a file
okay and raid 1 mode is for mirroring
that means any piece of the file is
written to both the disks so that if one
of them fails you have the other copy
ready and in this case what happens is
when you're reading the file it is
twice as fast but when you're writing it
is only
as fast as n minus one so mirroring is
also one reason
hard disks which are sata type will have
a moving
component so they may get damaged over a
period of time so it's not about
if a hard disk fails usually to be
called as when the hard disk fails
because it will sure definitely will
fail
and so it has been a good practice to
have the storage in raid 1 mode for
operating system so that if one disk
fails other one is still serving you the
probability of both the disks failing at
the same time is very very low and
therefore if you invest in the second
disk for os alone
then your mission can be up and running
without any problem caused by the
hardware failure
raid 5 is when you have more than
3 disks so that you have an ability to
have
the data written to more than one disk
for every file so that
of the disks if one disk fails you have
not lost any file
now that kind of a
distributed parity
is very useful because
you can have large amount of storage
because you are writing to multiple
disks at the same time if one disk fails
you have not lost anything
and you can have that parity over
two disks if you opt for raid six
and that means that two disks can fail
and you still have not lost any data now
this actually gives a very good security
for your storage box
so that your services to offer the
storage based
data transfer can be
seamless and you don't have to worry if
any disk fails because
most of the modern hardware supports
hot swap that means if this case failed
you can actually plug it off and put a
new one on the fly and this server need
not be shut down
and the storage need not be stirred down
and everything just works quite smoothly
so
in situations of
these namely when you do mirroring or
raid 5 or 86
the usable capacity is less than the
actual capacity so that is something
that we have to accept because we are
actually taking the benefit of parity
therefore we have to lose something and
that is basically the usable capacity
so more the number of disks more is the
usable capacity but it will never be
equal to the actual capacity except when
you do the striping in which case parity
is absent
so here are some images from the
wikipedia which show you the philosophy
so raid 0 is striping only so which
means that a1 a2 a3 a4 so you can see
that the
bits and pieces of the file are written
to both the disks so they are actually
writing in speed 2
and when you're reading also it will be
speed so only thing is that if one disk
fails then you have lost the data so
it's not a good idea only for speed it
is good but not for
risk failure
raid 5 you can see that a1 a2 a3 and
then ap where p is a number you can
choose depending upon which part of the
file so which means that
you can write
one third of a file to a second disk
okay and you write the
other one third of the next segment to
the second disk and the second disk will
be shifted from zero to one to two to
three so that way what happens is that
in a red five if one disk completely
fails the other three will contain all
the three parts of every file and
therefore you can rebuild
the
disk three
again when you put a fresh one there
similarly rate six also will allow only
thing is there if you fail two disks you
still have
uh the redundancy available
raid one is where you have got exact
copies in two disks which is good if one
disk fails other one will continue to
run so for operating system alone people
tend to use raid one for the home
directory storage people tend to use a
raid 5 or raid 6.
so here is an image of synology in nass
box from amazon so here you can have
like you know a number of disks so you
can have a 30 terabyte or 70 terabyte
kind of storages which can be mounted as
a single partition in linux and all
these then will be configured as a raid
and the rest of the work is taken care
by the driver so you are looking at it
just as a partition and you can access
all the storage directly so let us look
at that demo by looking at storages
which are humongous
and you will realize from the size that
it cannot be from one disk it has to be
from raid so let us look at that as an
example
so let us look at the
storages that are available
in our machine so the desktop where i am
recording
i have got
storage that is about one terabyte you
can make out the
hard disk capacity here so we have
already looked at that
and
i will log on to my desktop machine
where i have got
slightly larger storage
and you see that here the storage says
it's 22 terabytes so the largest
capacity of a hard disk right now is
about 12 terabytes so
this definitely means that it cannot be
one disk so it is actually a raid
storage
which is coming from multiple disks and
for us it is mounted as just one volume
on a
folder called slash e-home so it's just
a path and on that we have got 22
terabytes
available
thanks to the raid
concept now let us look at what kind of
stories available on the intel dev cloud
just for curiosity
so
we have a lot of mount points but here
is the p store which is parallel storage
system which shows that they have about
300 terabyte storage three times so
roughly one beta byte storage is
available on the intel dev cloud for
free for us when we create our login and
use it so this is obviously not easy to
imagine so there is no single hard disk
that will give you this kind of capacity
this is all collection of multiple hard
disks being made available as a single
folder on the linux so you can see that
for the convenience of a folder that is
mounted you have got a humongous amount
of storage available thanks to the
technologies that are available
of combining multiple disks into a
logical volume
we will also login to
the supercomputer in our own
campus
so where we can look at what is the
storage
and here you can see that it has
two
folders where they are mounting the
storage slash lfs and slash lfs one
and these are respectively uh about 264
terabyte and 791 terabyte together it's
about one petabyte storage so in our
supercomputer on campus we have a
petabyte storage again it is made
possible because there are lot of drives
that are actually combined together as a
logical volume for the linux to
make it as an offering for the users so
that they can simply
access their folders on these
paths
and work quite smoothly without worrying
about which part of their file is stored
on which hard disk in which collection
of hard disks etc
so raid makes all these things very much
possible with the speed and lvm
technology makes this possible for us to
mount as a single mount point in the
linux file system so by learning more
about these two technologies
we may be able to
save some
time and effort as well as money for
example so for example when you want to
have
a large amount of storage for your
desktop instead of buying the capacity
that is right now released
you can buy cheaper ones which are at a
lower capacity and combine them as a
raid volume and thereby have a speed up
resilience against failure of one of the
hard disks and at the same time mount it
as a single path in your file system for
the convenience also so linux allows all
these things
so knowing about these technologies may
help you in building your own machine
and also configuring one which is fast
resilient against hardware failures and
convenient
for large systems that you may want to
work on
so i hope this was useful for you so
with that we come to the end of
these
discussions about
linux operating system
terminal environment
and writing scripts
have fun